CrossFit is a core strength and conditioning program.
We have designed our program to elicit as broad an
adaptational response as possible. CrossFit is not a
specialized fitness program but a deliberate attempt to
optimize physical competence in each of ten recognized
fitness domains. They are Cardiovascular and Respiratory
endurance, Stamina, Strength, Flexibility, Power, Speed,
Coordination, Agility, Balance, and Accuracy.
The CrossFit Program was developed to enhance an
individual’s competency at all physical tasks. Our
athletes are trained to perform successfully at multiple,
diverse, and randomized physical challenges. This
fitness is demanded of military and police personnel,
firefighters, and many sports requiring total or complete
physical prowess. CrossFit has proven effective in these
arenas.
Aside from the breadth or totality of fitness the CrossFit
Program seeks, our program is distinctive, if not unique,
in its focus on maximizing neuroendocrine response,
developing power, cross-training with multiple training
modalities, constant training and practice with functional
movements, and the development of successful diet
strategies
Our athletes are trained to bike, run, swim, and row at
short, middle, and long distances guaranteeing exposure
and competency in each of the three main metabolic
pathways.
We train our athletes in gymnastics from rudimentary
to advanced movements garnering great capacity at
controlling the body both dynamically and statically while
maximizing strength to weight ratio and flexibility. We
also place a heavy emphasis on Olympic Weightlifting
having seen this sport’s unique ability to develop an
athletes’ explosive power, control of external objects,
and mastery of critical motor recruitment patterns. And
finally we encourage and assist our athletes to explore a
variety of sports as a vehicle to express and apply their
fitness.
In gyms and health clubs throughout the world the
typical workout consists of isolation movements and
extended aerobic sessions. The fitness community
from trainers to the magazines has the exercising public
believing that lateral raises, curls, leg extensions, sit-ups
and the like combined with 20-40 minute stints on the
stationary bike or treadmill are going to lead to some kind
of great fitness. Well, at CrossFit we work exclusively
with compound movements and shorter high intensity
cardiovascular sessions. We’ve replaced the lateral
raise with pushpress, the curl with pull-ups, and the leg
extension with squats. For every long distance effort
our athletes will do five or six at short distance. Why?
Because compound or functional movements and high
intensity or anaerobic cardio is radically more effective at
eliciting nearly any desired fitness result. Startlingly, this
is not a matter of opinion but solid irrefutable scientific
fact and yet the marginally effective old ways persist and
are nearly universal. Our approach is consistent with
what is practiced in elite training programs associated
with major university athletic teams and professional
sports. CrossFit endeavors to bring state-of-the-art
coaching techniques to the general public and athlete
who haven’t access to current technologies, research,
and coaching methods.
Absolutely! Your needs and the Olympic athlete’s
differ by degree not kind. Increased power, strength,
cardiovascular and respiratory endurance, flexibility,
stamina, coordination, agility, balance, and coordination
are each important to the world’s best athletes and
to our grandparents. The amazing truth is that the
very same methods that elicit optimal response in the
Olympic or professional athlete will optimize the same
response in the elderly. Of course, we can’t load your
grandmother with the same squatting weight that we’d
assign an Olympic skier, but they both need to squat.
In fact, squatting is essential to maintaining functional
independence and improving fitness. Squatting is
just one example of a movement that is universally
valuable and essential yet rarely taught to any but the
most advanced of athletes. This is a tragedy. Through
painstakingly thorough coaching and incremental load
assignment CrossFit has been able to teach anyone
who can care for themselves to perform safely and
with maximum efficacy the same movements typically
utilized by professional coaches in elite and certainly
exclusive environments.
Many professional and elite athletes are participating
in the CrossFit Program. Prize-fighters, cyclists, surfers,
skiers, tennis players, triathletes and others competing
at the highest levels are using the CrossFit approach to
advance their core strength and conditioning, but that’s
not all. CrossFit has tested its methods on the sedentary,
overweight, pathological, and elderly and found that
these special populations met the same success as
our stable of athletes. We call this “bracketing”. If our
program works for Olympic Skiers and overweight,
sedentary homemakers then it will work for you.
If your current routine looks somewhat like what we’ve
described as typical of the fitness magazines and gyms
don’t despair. Any exercise is better than none, and
you’ve not wasted your time. In fact, the aerobic exercise
that you’ve been doing is an essential foundation to
fitness and the isolation movements have given you
some degree of strength. You are in good company; we
have found that some of the world’s best athletes were
sorely lacking in their core strength and conditioning. It’s
hard to believe but many elite athletes have achieved
international success and are still far from their potential
because they have not had the benefit of state-of-the-art
coaching methods
CrossFit is a core strength and conditioning program
in two distinct senses. First, we are a core strength and conditioning program in the sense that the fitness we
develop is foundational to all other athletic needs. This is
the same sense in which the university courses required
of a particular major are called the “core curriculum”.
This is the stuff that everyone needs. Second, we are a
“core” strength and conditioning program in the literal
sense meaning the center of something. Much of our
work focuses on the major functional axis of the human
body, the extension and flexion, of the hips and extension,
flexion, and rotation of the torso or trunk. The primacy of
core strength and conditioning in this sense is supported
by the simple observation that powerful hip extension
alone is necessary and nearly sufficient for elite athletic
performance. That is, our experience has been that no
one without the capacity for powerful hip extension
enjoys great athletic prowess and nearly everyone we’ve
met with that capacity was a great athlete. Running,
jumping, punching and throwing all originate at the core.
At CrossFit we endeavor to develop our athletes from
the inside out, from core to extremity, which is by the
way how good functional movements recruit muscle,
from the core to the extremities
No! Athletes experience a protection from the ravages
of aging and disease that non-athletes never find.
For instance, 80-year-old athletes are stronger than
non-athletes in their prime at 25 years old. If you think
that strength isn’t important consider that strength
loss is what puts people in nursing homes. Athletes
have greater bone density, stronger immune systems,
less coronary heart disease, reduced cancer risk, fewer
strokes, and less depression than non-athletes
According to Merriam Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary,
an athlete is “a person who is trained or skilled in
exercises, sports, or games requiring strength, agility, or
stamina”.
The CrossFit definition of an athlete is a bit tighter.
The CrossFit definition of an athlete is “a person who
is trained or skilled in strength, power, balance and
agility, flexibility, and endurance”. The CrossFit model
holds “fitness”, “health”, and “athleticism” as strongly
overlapping constructs. For most purposes they can be
seen as equivalents.
You’re in luck. We hear this often, but the truth is
that fitness, wellness, and pathology (sickness) are
measures of the same entity, your health. There are
a multitude of measurable parameters that can be
ordered from sick (pathological) to well (normal) to
fit (better than normal). These include but are not
limited to blood pressure, cholesterol, heart rate, body
fat, muscle mass, flexibility, and strength. It seems as
though all of the body functions that can go awry have
states that are pathological, normal, and exceptional and
that elite athletes typically show these parameters in the
exceptional range. The CrossFit view is that fitness and
health are the same thing. It is also interesting to notice
that the health professional maintains your health with
drugs and surgery each with potentially undesirable side
effect whereas the CrossFit Coach typically achieves a
superior result always with “side benefit” vs. side effect.

Examples of crossfit exercises
Biking, running, swimming, and rowing in an endless
variety of drills. The clean&jerk, snatch, squat, deadlift,
push-press, bench-press, and power-clean. Jumping,
medicine ball throws and catches, pull-ups, dips,
push-ups, handstands, presses to handstand, pirouettes,
kips, cartwheels, muscle-ups, sit-ups, scales, and holds.
We make regular use of bikes, the track, rowing shells
and ergometers, Olympic weight sets, rings, parallel
bars, free exercise mat, horizontal bar, plyometrics
boxes, medicine balls, and jump rope.
There isn’t a strength and conditioning program
anywhere that works with a greater diversity of tools,
modalities, and drills.
It is a common sentiment to feel that because of the
obligations of career and family that you don’t have the
time to become as fit as you might like. Here’s the good
news: world class, age group strength and conditioning
is obtainable through an hour a day six days per week
of training. It turns out that the intensity of training that
optimizes physical conditioning is not sustainable past
forty-five minutes to an hour. Athletes that train for
hours a day are developing skill or training for sports that
include adaptations inconsistent with elite strength and
conditioning. Past one hour, more is not better!
There is a near universal misconception that long
distance athletes are fitter that their short distance
counterparts. The triathlete, cyclist, and marathoner are
often regarded as among the fittest athletes on earth.
Nothing could be farther from the truth. The endurance
athlete has trained long past any cardiovascular health
benefit and has lost ground in strength, speed, and power,
typically does nothing for coordination, agility, balance,
and accuracy and possesses little more than average
flexibility. This is hardly the stuff of elite athleticism. The
CrossFit athlete, remember, has trained and practiced
for optimal physical competence in all ten physical
skills (cardiovascular/respiratory endurance, stamina,
flexibility, strength, power, speed, coordination, agility,balance, and accuracy). The excessive aerobic volume of
the endurance athlete’s training has cost him in speed,
power, and strength to the point where his athletic
competency has been compromised. No triathlete is in
ideal shape to wrestle, box, pole-vault, sprint, play any
ball sport, fight fires, or do police work. Each of these
requires a fitness level far beyond the needs of the
endurance athlete. None of this suggests that being a
marathoner, triathlete or other endurance athlete is a bad
thing; just don’t believe that training as a long distance
athlete gives you the fitness that is prerequisite to many
sports. CrossFit considers the Sumo Wrestler, triathlete,
marathoner, and power lifter to be “fringe athletes” in
that their fitness demands are so specialized as to be
inconsistent with the adaptations that give maximum
competency at all physical challenges. Elite strength and
conditioning is a compromise between each of the ten
physical adaptations. Endurance athletes do not balance
that compromise.
There are three main energy systems that fuel all human
activity. Almost all changes that occur in the body due
to exercise are related to the demands placed on these
energy systems. Furthermore, the efficacy of any given
fitness regimen may largely be tied to its ability to elicit
an adequate stimulus for change within these three
energy systems.
Energy is derived aerobically when oxygen is utilized to
metabolize substrates derived from food and liberates
energy. An activity is termed aerobic when the majority
of energy needed is derived aerobically. These activities
are usually greater than ninety seconds in duration
and involve low to moderate power output or intensity.
Examples of aerobic activity include running on the
treadmill for twenty minutes, swimming a mile, and
watching TV.
Energy is derived anaerobically when energy is liberated
from substrates in the absence of oxygen. Activities are
considered anaerobic when the majority of the energy
needed is derived anaerobically. These activities are of
less than two minutes in duration and involve moderate
to high power output or intensity. There are two such
anaerobic systems, the phosphagen system and the
lactic acid system. Examples of anaerobic activity
include running a 100-meter sprint, squatting, and doing
pull-ups.
Our main purpose here is to discuss how anaerobic
and aerobic training support performance variables like
strength, power, speed, and endurance. We also support
the contention that total conditioning and optimal health
necessitates training each of the physiological systems
in a systematic fashion.
It warrants mention that in any activity all three energy
systems are utilized though one may dominate. The
interplay of these systems can be complex, yet a
simple examination of the characteristics of aerobic vs.
anaerobic training can prove useful.
Aerobic training benefits cardiovascular function and
decreases body fat. This is certainly of significant benefit.
Aerobic conditioning allows us to engage in moderate/
low power output for extended period of time. This is
valuable for many sports. Athletes engaging in excessive
aerobic training witness decreases in muscle mass,
strength, speed, and power. It is not uncommon to find
marathoners with a vertical leap of several inches and
a bench press well below average for most athletes.
Aerobic activity has a pronounced tendency to decrease
anaerobic capacity. This does not bode well for athletes
or the individual interested in total conditioning or
optimal health.
Anaerobic activity also benefits cardiovascular function
and decreases body fat. Anaerobic activity is unique in its
capacity to dramatically improve power, speed, strength,
and muscle mass. Anaerobic conditioning allows us to
exert tremendous forces over a very brief time. Perhaps
the aspect of anaerobic conditioning that bears greatest
consideration is that anaerobic conditioning will not
adversely affect aerobic capacity! In fact, properly
structured, anaerobic activity can be used to develop
a very high level of aerobic fitness without the muscle
wasting consistent with high volume aerobic exercise!
Basketball, football, gymnastics, boxing, track and field
events under one mile, soccer, swimming events under
400 yards, volleyball, wrestling, and weightlifting are all
sports that require the majority of training time spent in
anaerobic activity. Long distance and ultra-endurance
running, cross-country skiing, and 1500+ yard swimming
are all sports that require aerobic training at levels
that produce results unacceptable to other athletes or
individuals concerned with total conditioning or optimal
health.
The CrossFit approach is to judiciously balance anaerobic
and aerobic exercise in a manner that is consistent with
the athlete’s goals. Our exercise prescriptions adhere to
proper specificity, progression, variation, and recovery to
optimize adaptations.
The Olympic Lifts, a.k.a., Weightlifting
There are two Olympic lifts, the clean and jerk and
the snatch. Mastery of these lifts develops the squat,
deadlift, powerclean, and split jerk while integrating
them into a single movement of unequaled value in all
of strength and conditioning. The Olympic lifters are
without a doubt the world’s strongest athletes.
These lifts train athletes to effectively activate more
muscle fibers more rapidly than through any other
modality of training. The explosiveness that results from
this training is of vital necessity to every sport.
Practicing the Olympic lifts teaches one to apply force
to muscle groups in proper sequence, i.e., from the
center of the body to its extremities (core to extremity).
Learning this vital technical lesson benefits all athletes
who need to impart force to another person or object as
is commonly required in nearly all sports.
In addition to learning to impart explosive forces, the
clean and jerk and snatch condition the body to receive
such forces from another moving body both safely and
effectively.
Numerous studies have demonstrated the Olympic lifts
unique capacity to develop strength, muscle, power,
speed, coordination, vertical leap, muscular endurance,
bone strength, and the physical capacity to withstand
stress. It is also worth mentioning that the Olympic lifts
are the only lifts shown to increase maximum oxygen
uptake, the most important marker for cardiovascular
fitness.
Sadly, the Olympic lifts are seldom seen in the commercial
fitness community because of their inherently complex
and technical nature. CrossFit makes them available to
anyone with the patience and persistence to learn.
Gymnastics
The extraordinary value of gymnastics as a training
modality lies in its reliance on the body’s own weight
as the sole source of resistance. This places a unique
premium on the improvement of strength to weight ratio.
Unlike other strength training modalities gymnastics
and calisthenics allow for increases in strength only
while increasing strength to weight ratio!
Gymnastics develops pull-ups, squats, lunges, jumping,
push-ups, and numerous presses to handstand, scales,
and holds. These skills are unrivaled in their benefit to
the physique as evident in any competitive gymnast.
As important as the capacity of this modality is for
strength development it is without a doubt the ultimate
approach to improving coordination, balance, agility,
accuracy, and flexibility. Through the use of numerous
presses, handstands, scales, and other floor work the
gymnast’s training greatly enhances kinesthetic sense.
The variety of movements available for inclusion in this
modality probably exceeds the number of exercises
known to all non-gymnastic sport! The rich variety here
contributes substantially to the CrossFit program’s
ability to inspire great athletic confidence and prowess.
For a combination of strength, flexibility, well-developed
physique, coordination, balance, accuracy, and agility the
gymnast has no equal in the sports world. The inclusion
of this training modality is absurdly absent from nearly
all training programs.
Routines
There is no ideal routine! In fact, the chief value of any
routine lies in abandoning it for another. The CrossFit
ideal is to train for any contingency. The obvious
implication is that this is possible only if there is a
tremendously varied, if not randomized, quality to the
breadth of stimulus. It is in this sense that the CrossFit
Program is a core strength and conditioning program.
Anything else is sport specific training not core strength
and conditioning.
Any routine, no matter how complete, contains within
its omissions the parameters for which there will be no
adaptation. The breadth of adaptation will exactly match
the breadth of the stimulus. For this reason the CrossFit
program embraces short, middle, and long distance
metabolic conditioning, low, moderate, and heavy load
assignment. We encourage creative and continuously
varied compositions that tax physiological functions
against every realistically conceivable combination of
stressors. This is the stuff of surviving fights and fires.
Developing a fitness that is varied yet complete defines
the very art of strength and conditioning coaching.
This is not a comforting message in an age where
scientific certainty and specialization confer authority
and expertise. Yet, the reality of performance
enhancement cares not one wit for trend or authority. The
CrossFit Program’s success in elevating the performance
of world-class athletes lies clearly in demanding of our
athletes total and complete physical competence. No
routine takes us there.
Neuroendocrine Adaptation
“Neuroendocrine adaptation” is a change in the body
that affects you either neurologically or hormonally.
Most important adaptations to exercise are in part
or completely a result of a hormonal or neurological
shift. Current research, much of it done by Dr. William
Kraemer, Penn State University, has shown which
exercise protocols maximize neuroendocrine responses.
Earlier we faulted isolation movements as being
ineffectual. Now we can tell you that one of the critical
elements missing from these movements is that they
invoke essentially no neuroendocrine response.
Among the hormonal responses vital to athletic
development are substantial increases in testosterone,
insulin-like growth factor, and human growth hormone.
Exercising with protocols known to elevate these
hormones eerily mimics the hormonal changes sought
in exogenous hormonal therapy (steroid use) with none
of the deleterious effect. Exercise regimens that induce
a high neuroendocrine response produce champions!
Increased muscle mass and bone density are just two
of many adaptative responses to exercises capable of
producing a significant neuroendocrine response.
It is impossible to overstate the importance of the
neuroendocrine response to exercise protocols. This is
why it is one of the four defining themes of the CrossFit
Program. Heavy load weight training, short rest between
sets, high heart rates, high intensity training, and short
rest intervals, though not entirely distinct components,
are all associated with a high neuroendocrine response.
Power
Power is defined as the “time rate of doing work.” It has
often been said that in sport speed is king. At CrossFit
“power” is the undisputed king of performance. Power
is in simplest terms, “hard and fast.” Jumping, punching,
throwing, and sprinting are all measures of power.
Increasing your ability to produce power is necessary
and nearly sufficient to elite athleticism. Additionally,
power is the definition of intensity, which in turn has
been linked to nearly every positive aspect of fitness.
Increases in strength, performance, muscle mass, and
bone density all arise in proportion to the intensity
of exercise. And again, intensity is defined as power.
Power is one of the four defining themes of the CrossFit
Program. Power development is an ever-present aspect
of the CrossFit Daily Workout.
Cross-Training
Cross training is typically defined as participating in
multiple sports. At CrossFit we take a much broader
view of the term. We view cross training as exceeding
the normal parameters of the regular demands of your
sport or training. The CrossFit Program recognizes
functional, metabolic, and modal cross training. That is
we regularly train past the normal motions, metabolic
pathways, and modes or sports common to the athlete’s
sport or exercise regimen. We are unique and again
distinctive to the extent that we adhere to and program
within this context.
If you remember the CrossFit objective of providing a
broad based fitness that provides maximal competency in
all adaptive capacities, cross training, or training outside
of the athletes normal or regular demands is a given.
The CrossFit coaching staff had long ago noticed that
athletes are weakest at the margins of their exposure for
almost every measurable parameter. For instance, if you
only cycle between five to seven miles at each training
effort you will test weak at less than five and greater
than seven miles. This is true for range of motion, load,
rest, intensity, and power, etc. The CrossFit workouts are
engineered to expand the margins of exposure as broad
as function and capacity will allow. Cross training is one
of the four CrossFit defining themes.
Functional Movements
There are movements that mimic motor recruitment
patterns that are found in everyday life. Others are
somewhat unique to the gym. Squatting is standing
from a seated position; deadlifting is picking any object
off the ground. They are both functional movements. Leg
extension and leg curl both have no equivalent in nature
and are in turn nonfunctional movements. The bulk of
isolation movements are non-functional movements.
By contrast the compound or multi-joint movements
are functional. Natural movement typically involves the
movement of multiple joints for every activity.
The importance of functional movements is primarily
two-fold. First of all the functional movements are
mechanically sound and therefore safe, and secondly
they are the movements that elicit a high neuroendocrine
response.
CrossFit has managed a stable of elite athletes and
dramatically enhanced their performance exclusively
with functional movements. The superiority of training
with functional movements is clearly apparent with any
athlete within weeks of their incorporation.
The soundness and efficacy of functional movement is so
profound that exercising without them is by comparison
a colossal waste of time. For this reason functional
movement is one of the four dominant CrossFit themes.
Diet
The CrossFit dietary prescription is as follows:
Protein should be lean and varied and account for about
30% of your total caloric load.
Carbohydrates should be predominantly low-glycemic
and account for about 40% of your total caloric load.
Fat should be predominantly monounsaturated and
account for about 30% of your total caloric load.
Calories should be set at between .7 and 1.0 grams of
protein per pound of lean body mass depending on your
activity level. The .7 figure is for moderate daily workout
loads and the 1.0 figure is for the hardcore athlete.
What Should I Eat?
In plain language, base your diet on garden vegetables,
especially greens, lean meats, nuts and seeds, little
starch, and no sugar. That’s about as simple as we can
get. Many have observed that keeping your grocery cart
to the perimeter of the grocery store while avoiding
the aisles is a great way to protect your health. Food is
perishable. The stuff with long shelf life is all circumspect.
